For many women, menopause
is a turning point in bone strength.
Over time, it can lead to development of osteoporosis
and increased risk for fractures.
Osteoporosis results from an
imbalance in bone remodeling.
Removal—also called resorption
outpaces formation of new bone.
Before menopause,
there is a relative balance between the removal of
old bone by cells called osteoclasts
and the formation of new bone
by cells called osteoblasts.
This is a complex and constant process.
When estrogen levels decline,
osteoclasts become overactive.
They remove bone faster than it can be replaced.
Over time, this can lead to thinning
and weakening of bone
that may put you at risk for fracture.
The diagnosis of osteoporosis
can in part be based on a bone density scan
and the result is shown as a T-score.
A T-score of less than or equal to
negative 2.5 defines osteoporosis
and the lower the score,
the higher the risk of fracture can be.
Many other factors also contribute to risk of fracture.
Some of these include:
A prior osteoporotic fracture;
Family history of hip fracture;
Cigarette smoking; and
Excess consumption of alcohol.
It is important for women to be aware
of the risks associated with osteoporosis
after menopause.
Your doctor can help to estimate your risk of fracture
and steps you can take to reduce this risk.